And welcome to another podcast from no such thing as a fish a weekly show coming to you
from the QI offices in Covent Garden.
My name is Anna Toshinsky and I'm sitting here with James Harkin, Andrew Hunter Murray
and fellow QI Elf James Rawson and we are going to tell you our four favourite facts
from our last seven days starting with Rawson.
My fact this week is that Usain Bolt could fly on Titan.
Do we say Usain or Usain?
Oh good question.
I say Usain.
Do you?
But Usain, Usain.
What?
Let's call the whole thing up.
And so Titan we're talking about the Isaac Titan.
No it's Titan.
We're talking about the moon.
We are talking about Saturn's largest moon and it has a couple of things going for it
that make it really great for human flight.
Well one bad thing, lack of humans.
Yes, that is a bad thing but a good thing is that its gravity is only 14% as strong
as Earth's, so pretty low gravity and its air pressure is 50% higher than Earth's.
So really weak gravity and really strong nice thick air.
So people have said anecdotally for years that if you could get people on their straps
and wings on them they'd be able to fly like birds.
But in 2014 some students from the University of Leicester actually did the physics and they
worked out that if you were on a normal wingsuit which has a wingspan of about 1.4 square meters
and if you were on a 11 meters per second you would be able to run, jump up and take off
and fly.
So great.
So if you're a normal person you couldn't, right?
It's only if you're as fast as Usain Bolt.
He is just him and a few others who are cracking that speed.
So Usain Bolt can go at 12 meters per second or he could in his head, he's now retired.
So I imagine that he's useless but yeah, Usain Bolt in the day could do it, a normal person
could do it if they could run at 6 meters per second but they would have a large and unwieldy
wingsuit.
So they wouldn't be able to get away with the normal sort of day-to-day wingsuit that we're
all wearing now.
Very cool.
You also need a very warm coat though wouldn't you?
Because the temperature is about -180 degrees Celsius.
Yes.
And actually warm coat would weigh you down quite a lot and then the physics probably wouldn't
work anymore.
We've got a very big coat.
Yeah.
You remember when you were a kid and there was high winds, like gales and you would hold
your coat out and then try and fly with it.
Yeah, that was great.
Or your umbrella.
Sometimes you'd fly with an umbrella?
Yeah.
Well, I wasn't Mary Poppins when I went to school but actually you couldn't do it with
the winds because there's not much wind on Titan, is there?
No.
And that's because the temperature is always very low and we get our wind on Earth because
of the changes in temperature with the sun and they don't really get those changes of temperature.
Yeah, which is why they - because they've got lakes.
One of the reasons it's so great for human habitation, apparently, is that it's got stable
liquids on its surface, hasn't it, which is extremely unusual, and it has an atmosphere
that is sort of similar to Earth's, but it's liquids - well, similar, yes.
It's not similar.
It's a fairly similar level of kind of thickness and it's got some nitrogen in it.
It's got lots and lots of nitrogen.
There's no problem with nitrogen.
You like nitrogen, you get a lot of Titan, but it's got no oxygen basically.
Yeah.
So the lakes are made out of methane.
They are.
It sort of has a lot of methane and ethane in it, which I imagine means that it smells really
bad on there.
Well, in fact, I think they might have looked into how the atmosphere there smells.
They've tried to recreate it.
Scientists did this this year or last year and they got some methane and ethane involved.
They got some nitrogen involved and it still wasn't behaving quite like Titan's atmosphere.
And then they added some benzene and that's the crucial ingredient that mimics the atmosphere
and it smells like petrol.
So the whole place, if we live there, smells like petrol station.
Yeah.
I kept the smell of petrol stations.
Can I just say it's one of my favourite smells?
Yeah.
It's very nice.
I like that too, but a lot of people kept saying how good Titan would be and they were saying
things like that.
It's got some liquid.
It's got an atmosphere.
It's the only other place in our solar system where it rains.
It just sounds like a recipe for a very bad picnic.
I think it's really, really habitable compared to the other moons of solar system, which is
a bit of a low bar.
The other thing about picnics is instead of lost flying around, you have 100 meter runners
kind of fly around.
Another good thing about Titan, since you're so busy bouncing it, is that they've recreated
also Titan's lakes because there's a plan for NASA to send a submarine up there in 2025.
I'd send a spaceship if I was NASA, but I'd go on.
You need to ride to them.
They're sending a submarine up and they're going to get there and they need to dive, so they
need to deal with the coldness of the liquid, but they realise that icebergs can't form.
So one of the people we're creating, as I said, a really vital positive is the fact that
because the freezing temperature of these methane lakes is so low, icebergs not a possibility,
so you won't get Titanic on Titan and also the submarine won't crash into any icebergs.
Do you know who might be crewing this submarine that we're going to send up?
Robots.
Bacteria.
Come on.
Well, it's a stretch, but.
No, so there are deep sea bacteria which theoretically could survive there.
Well, they can't drive a spaceship or a submarine, they'll be an intense training montage
with the bacteria.
No, but they're called, oh, this is a tough name, methanol thermococcus ocanoensis and
they can survive irrespective of temperature and pressure and vitamins and toxic chemicals.
And I think they live around vents very deep in the sea.
Vitamin E, did you say?
Yeah, they don't even.
They wouldn't even need to take vitamin meals in pill form when they're at bay.
I don't save on satzoomerite.
I think basically they just go into hibernation as soon as the conditions are right for them
to spring back into what they do.
So we could possibly set up a submarine in front of those guys and just see how they did.
I went on to Yale Scientific Magazine because they had an article, "Why can't humans fly?"
Yeah, we can't, turns out.
We would need a wingspan of at least 6.7 meters to fly according to this website.
That's 6.7 across the whole wingspan, so 3.35 either side.
Yeah, it's still a lot and would make the wings too heavy to function, and also the muscles
that you need.
So those wings wouldn't need to have smaller wings, helping them fly.
But we've sort of cracked quite an important human powered flight thing really recently,
isn't we?
Because there was a price set up in 1970, I think it was, awarding £250,000 for the first
person to make a human powered helicopter.
And it was thought to be impossible and all these studies were written saying it's impossible.
And I only found Nick's was reading a Washington Post article saying, "No one's come anywhere
close to achieving this in 2011."
And in 2013, we did it, or engineers from the University of Toronto did it.
And they've built this helicopter, which is basically about the size of a football pitch with
these...
I would buy one human.
Yeah, it's unbelievably light.
It weighs only 50 kilos, but it's ridiculously large, because as you say, you've got to have
really big wings.
And there's a little guy on a bicycle in the middle of it, who does, but he's cycling up.
It's amazing.
And then, well, it's not as amazing as it would be.
But it's so...
My wife flies helicopters.
Yeah.
And we always have to find a place for her to land, which is not too many trees around
and stuff like that.
I think if your helicopter's a size of a football pitch, that is going to be tough, right?
It's too big.
I looked up a list of names of human-powered flight machines.
Oh, great.
They were called things like the reluctant Phoenix.
That's what a drag name is, isn't it?
That does sound like they once crashed it in a ball of flames.
Yeah.
They couldn't get it back again, right?
There was a reluctantly...
The Perkins inflatable, which I liked, there was the puffin.
The puffin, too.
And there were three called Icarus, named after...
Why did they name it after the thing that...
The one who dies?
Yeah.
They only read the first half of the story.
This is great.
Don't need to finish.
Really respect this guy's confidence.
You same Bolt, who I know you've touched on in the past, but did you know that...
So he has scoliosis, so he has curvature of the spine.
So his legs are actually significantly different length from each other.
So his...
Not quite as dramatic as Richard III, I don't think.
But his right leg is half an inch shorter than his left.
The prevailing wisdom is that if you want to go in a straight line as fast as you can,
you should be symmetrical.
And obviously he's not quite symmetrical.
And they don't know if he was symmetrical, would he go faster?
Or does this slight off-balance somehow work in his favour?
Because he goes pretty quick from what out of his hands, actually, yeah.
You do know about the sport.
For someone who doesn't like sport, you've picked a very sport-based fact, involving
both printing and flying.
And there is a sprinter at the moment called Brianna Liston.
And she's 12 years old.
She's from Jamaica.
And in 2017, she ran the 100 metres in 11.86 seconds, which is unbelievably fast.
And in fact, if she'd have taken part in the 1896 Olympics, she would have won.
By more than 0.1 of a second.
12-year-old girl.
And the team behind the Cassini mission, which was the probe that went to Saturn, and it
dropped off the, how do you pronounce it?
Huygens is the moon lander that they dropped down.
It's the only human thing ever to land on a body beyond the asteroid belt.
And now it's there.
It's going to be there for millions of years.
It's very, very cool.
Anyway, the Cassini probe, the team behind it.
They spent 20 years working on it.
There's a huge long project.
And they got so close that they had all these cool team things that they did together.
So, they had a softball team called the Roving Marauders.
And whenever there was a big date in Cassini or Saturn or what it tightened history, they would
brew a special beer and they'd give it a special name.
Yeah.
Nice.
Do you think we should do that?
We don't have enough for softball teams.
Oh, we already do, James.
Do we?
The softball's only a three-player game.
Oh.
And there's a no James's rule, and I already turn up, so.
OK, we should move on to fact number two.
And that is my fact.
My fact this week is that in 1604, one of King James' first grooms rode from London to York
and back five times in the space of five days for a bet.
Wow.
Did you choose a James' fact because James Rossin is here today?
I did, yeah.
It's the first James.
You've never done a James' fact before.
I just never noticed you being here, I guess.
Yeah, this is really cool.
So this is a guy called John Lepton.
And it was first recorded in this amazing book, which I wasted all my research time reading
today, which was this book called "A Bridgment of the English Chronicle."
And it was written in 1604 by a guy who died in 1605, so he just got in there.
And yeah, it was this story that he sort of said that he reckon he'd be able to go to
and from London and York five times in six days.
And he ended up managing to do it with one day, too, spare.
Wow.
It is really good, doesn't it?
Yeah.
Is it a different horse every time?
That's the annoying thing.
It wasn't recorded.
How have any changed his horses?
You would normally change your horse, though, on a journey that long, I think.
Would you?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
From my knowledge of horses.
Probably swapping at Watford Gap.
Yeah.
So when he finished this, according to the book that I read, it said, I think this is probably
the same one.
So he finished his appointed journey to the admiration of all men.
In five days, and upon Tuesday the 28th, he came to court at Greenwich to his majesty in
a fresh and cheerful amount as when he first began.
Yeah.
Nice.
Although he arrived on, so he was due to arrive on the Saturday night, it's really cool
this account because it really gives intense details of the time he arrived, how long he slept
for.
He arrived on the Friday night, and then there is a gap in our knowledge for the Saturday
and the Sunday.
Let me imagine he got absolutely hammered in York for Saturday and Sunday.
Workout with it.
Hainers hang over on Monday and then struggled back to be cheerful on Tuesday.
Sounds great.
One thing that I think I read about this, which I think is quite interesting, from the Journal
of Sport History, it said that this could kind of be seen as the first sporting record.
So it wasn't really until the 19th century that people became obsessed with like, I've
done this sport in this amount of time.
You know, that kind of record-breaking mentality.
There was another two centuries before men began routinely to abstract the quantified performance
as a mark to be equaled or surpassed.
But this is kind of the first instance of that happening, he said, I can travel this long
in this distance.
Yeah.
Will you put money on it?
Exactly.
Yeah.
That's really cool.
They do, don't they?
They call it the first sort of sporting match that we have a record of.
But I was reading again in this book that there were lots of really weirdly progressive rules
around it.
So it became a huge gambling thing.
We often bet on horse races then as now, but if you won more than 100 marks on a horse race,
you had to give up all of your remainder to the poor.
So that was a rule that was introduced in James' time.
There was an act passed in Scotland that said, stop feeding horses hard meat in summer.
That practice being held one among other occasions of death of the victims, which I think is basically
the poor people need meat in summer.
And if people keep feeding it to their horses, then the poor people aren't getting it, which
is very progressive.
I feel like the National Lottery.
Exactly like the National Lottery.
Where if you were more than 100 quid, you have to give the rest of the poor.
Have you been not quite like the National Lottery?
Do you know about John Lepton's other horse feet?
No.
Do you mean hooves?
Yeah, hooves, that's it.
So, surely after this event, there was, remember, remember the fifth November, the Gump
Harder Plot, and a couple of days after Thomas Percy was a fugitive, he was involved in the
conspiracy, everyone was looking for him.
So he had connections in Northumberland, Cumberland and Yorkshire in the North of England.
And people thought that he might be sort of hiding out there.
So our hero, John Lepton, was sent to see if they could find him.
No way.
And according to my source, John Lepton missed his man and his epic ride took him to Scotland
before he realised that the trail had gone cold.
So in that instance, he sort of overshot his mark a little bit.
Well, because he was so fast, so he was probably going by the average time he was told
it would be.
He probably thought he was in Wolverhampton.
Yeah.
And then he was in Scotland.
I've got to think about a great horse racing bet.
Oh god.
Well, this is a bet about distance and travel.
So there was a guy called Lord March, who made a bet that he could get a letter 50 miles
in an hour, which at the time exactly was impossible.
I would take that bet.
Yeah, exactly.
No horse couldn't run at 50 miles an hour for an hour.
No.
Even if you were on a cheetah, it would be pretty hard.
A cheetah couldn't do that.
He won the bet.
No.
Yes, he didn't use horses.
And he used pigeons.
No.
That's quite a good idea.
Although, I don't know.
Even though I'm not sure they can go at 50 miles an hour.
What he did was, this is very clever.
He put the letter inside a ball.
Okay.
And then he hired...
Oh, hamsters.
No.
He hired 20 expert cricketers and for an hour, they threw it in a massive circle all the
way around over and over again.
Oh.
The letter travelled more than 50 miles.
No way.
In that hour.
Doesn't count.
He won the bet.
Well, I wouldn't pay up.
Wait.
Hasn't got anywhere.
I think that's a really crafty, crafty Lord March.
It's a clever man.
I've got a couple of ridiculous wages from the 18th century.
So I think that wages really took off in the 18th century when it all just got a bit
silly.
In 1735, Count De Bookberg, better large wage on riding to Edinburgh, backwards on a horse,
which was accomplished in just under four days.
I don't know if the count did it or if it got someone to do it.
So just to be clear, the horse is going forwards, but you're facing backwards.
Oh, it's the horse facing backwards.
I think it's like on a train where the train's going forward and you're facing backwards.
Yeah.
You probably didn't need to make a train analogy though.
It's like a horse going forwards and you're facing backwards.
And in 1770, I read this from the gentleman, which is just so great, two hours bad that
one could ride from London to Edinburgh and back in less time than it took the other one
to draw a million dots.
He's counting the million.
I do not know.
And so they announced the wager, but then there doesn't seem to be any sort of follow-up
or result section in the following in the following issue.
So you don't know who won that?
So I don't know who won.
It's actually, actually, you only don't know who won because it's a little
very long line of dots and you don't know what happens at the end of the long line of dots.
Yeah.
There's a lot of suspense.
But he could make the dots in the most expedient manner that he could contrive.
Which I think includes hiring people to draw dots or some sort of mechanical hiring million
people.
It's just one dot each.
Yeah.
Just glue a million pencils together and make one dot.
Just glue a million pencils together.
Does it count the time that you take gluing the pencils together or?
Yeah.
That's all part of it.
That's part of the time.
I mean, you missed the problem.
I see.
Like the time it takes me to press a dot.
Right, a dot.
You're not going to be able to do one pencil gluing, are you?
I would start gluing.
I would start drawing dots, but I would instruct a friend to go and hire a lot of people
immediately to come and join and hire more and draw more dots.
I reckon 1,000 people are 1,000 dots.
Oh, easy.
Yeah.
I'm paying 1,000 people.
Like peasants?
Yeah.
18th century peasants?
Can we just do what you tell them?
Yeah.
But so many peasants are illiterate.
I don't know that.
You can still draw a dot if you're illiterate.
No, they were really illiterate back then.
I've got lines.
What if you get a paintbrush and just kind of flick it?
Does that count as a dot?
Ooh.
Let me revisit the word here.
Amazing.
But what a good bet, because he will be drawing dots, drawing dots, and the other guy will
be writing to Edinburgh.
It's very exciting as a pencil, and they're different kinds of achievement as well.
Yeah.
I think that'll be really exciting.
I think if they had the Grand National and they also had some dots, writing competition
at the same time.
Yeah.
It would be a hell of a lot more popular.
No.
And there's another good bet, which is another kind of crafty bet, a bit like Andes, where
someone was outwisted.
This is in the 18th century, and the Earl of Barrymore, who apparently was known as Hellgate
or Rake of Rakes, because he was a big womanizer and a bit of a rake, he thought he was a bit
of a sport.
Yeah, like that.
He fancied himself as a sportsman, and this guy called Mr Bullock challenged him to a running
race, and Bullock was a massively fat, unfit man.
He weighed 18 stone, and he said, "I challenge you to a race, all I'm saying is I want a 35-yard
head start, and I want to be able to choose the route."
And Barrymore said, "Yeah, sure.
I'm way fatter than you.
Look at you, you're a mess."
And so lots of people put money on it, everyone backed Barrymore, and Bullock took those bets,
so he's the only one backing himself, and the route he chose ran through an extremely
narrow alley, and so he ran the entire route with poor old Barrymore not being able to squeeze
past him on either side, and apparently he sort of wobbled from side to side as he went
to make sure there was no way of passing.
Wow.
That is brilliant.
The fact about jockeys, as we're on horse racing, so jockey posture, that weird posture that
jockeys have, they're kind of crouched on the horse, they're all sort of hunched up.
This only caught on in 1898, before that, you would just sit upright and try and win the
horse race, and there was a guy, a jockey called James Forman Sloan, he started doing it,
and it was like the Fosbury flop, you know, in high jumping, within ten years, everyone
around the world was doing it, and horse race, completion times, improved by 5% to 7% over
those ten years, solely because of this guy.
Wow.
Yeah.
I can't believe they didn't figure that out before.
It's so obvious.
But it's not where reducing wind resistance, which I think it would be.
No, I wouldn't have thought that.
I would have thought you were kind of getting a bit of a kind of a movement going.
I mean, doing the jump, it's not grinding back and forth.
It's when you're upright, you're like a sandbag, and you jog up and down on the horse,
but when you're in a jockey position, or if they call it martini-glass position, you can
move relative to the horse, so you are moving at a more constant speed, and I think it just
helps the whole thing go a bit more smoothly.
Maybe for the horse and for you.
Like finding a resident's almost.
Yeah, exactly, yeah.
Do you guys know that the precursor to the steeple chase was the wild goose chase.
So I just came across this in old book, which was referring to a wild goose chase as an
actual race, and this was the main horse race that people bet on before the steeple chase,
and what you did was the horses all started running, and after racing each other, after 12 score
yards, after 240 yards, whoever was in the lead was the one who chose the route from that
point onwards.
And you had to play.
Amazing.
And so they all went into this really thin house.
And it was mad, and so you'd like dodge about, you jump over a ditch, and then suddenly
you'd take them over a massive fence, they didn't know what they were doing.
That's a really good idea, but then if you overtake them, do you then get to choose
the route?
No.
You've won.
Wait, but if you, if you overtake them, there's no route to get wrong, is there?
So if you overtake them, you choose the route.
That's why I was thinking, but actually that's the end of the race, if you are.
That's the end of the race, because apparently when you choose the route, when is the race
end?
You just have to run forever.
This is why it was banned.
So again, too many thousands of deaths.
It was very dangerous, and it was banned, according to this, like Sports Illustrated
Equivalent. It was banned because it was too hard on the horses and the riders, because
they would just collapse in the end.
They'd just go on and on and on, dodging about, and then one of them would collapse.
That's amazing.
But that's the original world goose chase.
In 2012, Prince Harry bought chairs in a horse called Usain Colt.
Amazing.
James, you get to edit that into either section of the show.
I love that. That's so funny.
Okay, we should move on to fact number three, and that is Andy's fact.
That's right.
My fact is that there are species of wasps, the size of a meba.
That's so cool.
Very cool.
And not special giant a meba, either, because there are giant a meba we talked about before
on the show.
Yeah, because I was going to say there's an a meba, which is 10 centimetres long.
Exactly.
The smallest dog is 9.65 centimetres, so there are dogs that are smaller than the mebbers.
So exactly.
A meba, James.
Yeah, can we clarify plurals?
A meba.
A meba, yeah.
So this is a wasp called Megafragma Mimari Penne, and it's 0.2 millimetres long.
It's the third smallest insect known, and the other two smaller ones are also wasps, so
I've just picked this guy, because he's been studied.
But it's the size of an meba.
And it's got eyes, brains, wings, muscle, gut.
So it's obviously made up of thousands and thousands and thousands of cells, but it's
the size of a one cell organism.
And it's done that.
There's been a study by a scientist called Alexei Pololov, and it found that basically they're
missing huge amounts of stuff, and they have to cut down on their own brains and remove
all the nuclei from the cells inside their skull just to make room for a few neurons.
Really?
It's incredibly weird.
So do they have nuclei, and then they extract them as they grow, or they just don't have any
nuclei having to start?
I think it destroys them until it only has a few hundred.
This is what I read.
Is it one of these that doesn't really need to make that many decisions in life?
Yeah.
It's like simple.
It doesn't need that many neurons, right?
But it's got to make, it's only got 100, 100th, perhaps, as many as a bee.
OK.
And bees themselves do not make that many decisions.
No.
Flower, high, flower, high.
It's about the size of a human ovum.
That does not help putting some effect on you.
No, no.
Think of a human ovum.
No.
I think of a very small full stop.
What the heck?
I think of a dot.
I think of a million of those.
I'm afraid you've only drawn 99999 dots, because this is a wasp.
[LAUGHTER]
The other...
Oh, winds of the wedge.
[LAUGHTER]
Yeah.
What was the name of the wasp?
Mega fragment, my maripeni.
There's another one, which is small.
I think it might be one of the two that's smaller than this one, called decopo motha.
Ech mepterygis, something like that.
And it's the males that are really small in this species.
I don't know if it's the same with yours.
And the reason they're so small is because basically they never leave their egg.
They kind of live inside their egg, and they mate with their sisters inside the egg.
And then the sisters fly off and they just die.
Oh, mate.
[LAUGHTER]
Broaden your eyes.
How?
That's crazy.
Yeah.
So that's the whole life.
They just...
They grow up in the egg.
They mate with their sisters.
They die.
So are these parasitic wasps?
Is it their own egg they're in?
Or are they in someone else's?
They're in their own egg.
OK.
Yeah.
But parasitic wasps are amazing.
Actually, you said wasps there instead of wasps.
So I'll say it again, then.
But do you know that wasp used to be wasps?
Really?
Yeah.
Just through people saying it wrong over the years.
As in it comes from an old, Germanic word, whoops.
And I really hope it shows an etymology with whoops.
It probably doesn't.
But it would be nice, wouldn't it?
Well, like whoops I've stepped on a...
On a wasps.
Yeah.
[LAUGHTER]
Yeah, parasitic wasps are totally awesome, aren't they?
Well, there's a piece by Ed Young, who writes a lot about bacteria.
He writes for the Atlantic.
It's a great piece.
He's so good.
I just want to say he's probably my favorite science journalist.
And you should all look.
Yeah, I agree.
All right.
I'll have my turn.
Do you get his weekly email that he sends with all of his writings?
And it...
Oh, well, I called you so much.
I called you so much.
There's a piece by him.
Where he's saying everyone thinks the beetle is the king of the things,
because there are so many species of them.
So he writes a bit better than saying the king of the things.
I don't think he does.
I don't think it's possible.
So there are 380,000 species of beetle,
which is a quarter of all animal species, which is a lot, obviously.
But there's a scientist from the University of Iowa called Andrew Forbes,
who reckons that there are so many parasitic wasps
and that every single species of insect even has at least one
and probably several species of tiny, tiny parasitic wasps inside it.
He reckons that wasps outnumber even beetles by about two and a half times.
So is that like if everyone on the planet had an average of two hats,
then there has to be more hats than people?
Exactly.
So the people are beetles than the hats of wasps?
Yes, exactly.
There are shed loads of wasps, given that we don't give them enough credit.
I think there are just over 5,000 species of mammal
and 14,000 of ant and 200,000 species of wasps.
And even if fig wasps have many thousands of species of fig wasps, don't they?
So we need to pay them more attention.
So small.
They're so small that no one notices them.
Even if you find a new beetle, it's probably got loads of wasps living in it,
but you don't know about.
There's an amazing quote from Josephine Rodriguez, who is an entomologist,
who was responding to this discussion about there being more wasps than beetles.
And she says, "It doesn't surprise me at all that there are more wasps.
I really think that only people that would disagree would be the fly people."
So just like the politics within entomology is great.
Oh, Pericomicalister isn't listening to this.
Yeah, she's a fly person.
Has she been on that fly?
We've had a run?
Yes.
Yeah, she'll be fuming.
She'll go out and find 100,000 different species of fly today.
There's a really cool parasitic wasp called the green eyed wasp,
which parasites of a ladybird.
So it lays its eggs inside a ladybird.
And then when they hatch, they come out.
And they immediately weave this cocoon between this ladybird's legs.
And this paralyzes the ladybird, but it also sort of possesses the ladybird,
so it turns it into a zombie.
When you say so weaving the cocoon between the legs, which paralyzes them,
is it like tying someone shoelaces together?
Exactly the same as that, except also if you tie someone shoelaces together
and then you injected their brain with some kind of chemical that turned them into a zombie.
That is a next-level prank.
You get two detentions for that one.
But yeah, this is really cool.
So this ladybird sits there and it's possessed, which means it twitches involuntarily,
which scares away any potential predators.
So it's just standing there like this great fort with the babies all in between its legs.
And then they crack out and leave, and the ladybird, I guess, dies.
No, not true.
Really?
A quarter of the ladybirds recover, and some of them are even parasitized again.
Oh my God.
So no.
Do you want to hear about my favourite messed-up was?
Yes, please.
Oh no, it's not.
It's a fly.
Anyway.
Well, Erica will love this.
Okay.
This is the smallest fly that exists.
And it feeds on itself really tiny ants, not even normal size ants, really small ants.
And what it does is the egg hatches inside the ant parasitic fly.
It goes into the head of the ant from inside, and it starts eating it.
So it feeds on the muscles that control the mouth parts, which are very big and muscular bits.
So the ant then can't chew.
So he's walking and I'm thinking, I can't chew anymore.
And then this tiny fly eats the brain.
So the ant now can't think anymore.
It can't even think I can't chew anymore.
Exactly.
But it stays walking around.
It walks around for another fortnight while this fly is inside it, eating it.
And then finally, the fly lover dissolves the membrane, which keeps the ants head on.
And the ants head comes off.
And then the fly just lives in the decapitated head for another fortnight,
which I think is the most goth thing I can possibly imagine.
How cool is that?
And then once it's an adult, it just leaves the head, leaves this decapitated head longer.
How insane.
Its self-hooks up, isn't it?
It's horrible.
You know that it's so fucked up, it made Charles Darwin question his belief in God.
Paracetic wasps, he wrote a letter to a fellow naturalist Aissa Gray,
said, "I cannot persuade myself that a beneficent and omnipotent God
would have designeddly created parasitic wasps."
He is the technical term, with the express intention of their feeding
within the living bodies of caterpillars.
Wow.
It's a good point.
It's not a nice thing to do.
He's a god, he's a god.
He then goes on to say, "Order to cat should play with mice."
So that also seemed up so in quite a lot as well.
Oh no, they're just having fun cats and mice.
We've all seen Tom and Jerry.
Fortunately, he didn't live to see that terror.
Do you want to hear my favourite paracetic wasps?
Yeah.
Oh, we've all got one.
It's so nice.
So it's Aissa Cody's Abitasis.
And it's a parasitic wasp, which lays its eggs in another wasp,
which is called Dibrakis Bukianus, and then that lays its eggs
in the pupae of a species of Icknumonodai wasps,
which then lays its eggs in the caterpillar of the Cricopia moth,
which lives and feeds in a popular wild cherry or apple tree.
So that means it's a parasite inside a parasite inside a parasite inside a tree.
Wow.
This is where my hat metaphor falls down.
It's the inception of the wasp world.
I think it's the most disgusting Russian doll you could ever see.
Do you want to know my least favourite wasp?
Yeah.
It's the tarantula hawk, and it's a type of wasp,
and it has the worst sting, probably, of any wasp.
And the recommendation, if you're stung by this wasp,
and this is in a peer-reviewed journal,
is to lie down and start screaming.
What does that do?
Well, apparently what happens is it's so painful that you're not going to be able
to maintain verbal or physical coordination after you're stung,
and you're likely to just kind of run off and hurt yourself.
I'll lie down.
And so the best thing to do is just lie down and scream,
and hopefully someone will come and help you.
Oh my God.
Wow.
It's such a good name as well.
Is it a tarantula?
Is it a hawk?
No, it's a wasp.
The smallest fly in the world is named after Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Nice, is that an ironic kind of thing?
No, it's because it's got big arms.
Yeah, come on.
It's a tiny fly with massive arms.
It's 0.395 millimeters long,
and it's arms are big relative to its body,
but they're not the size of Arnie.
You don't just see a pair of arms flying on the ground
and a tiny thing in between them.
And the scientist who discovered it, Brian Brown said,
"As soon as I saw those bulging legs,
I knew I had to name this one after Arnold Schwarzenegger.
He doesn't have, of course they don't have arms.
They've got front legs, haven't they?
It's that way you got your arms.
Oh, I've got my arms.
I've never known where you walk on all fours.
But we're all, all mammals have two arms and two legs,
or four legs.
But I believe flies are not mammals.
Well, we don't have time to give them the science of the fence.
We should probably move on in this case.
We can dig this hole on it deeper and we lose you entirely.
We should go on to fact number four,
and that is James' facts.
Okay, my fact this week is when Patonc players getting to fights,
it is known in the French press as bulliganism.
It's amazing.
Love it.
That's very good.
So I read this in a recent telegraph article,
and it is all about how they're trying
to smarten up the reputation of the sport of Patonc,
which is French bull.
So for anyone who doesn't know that,
it's basically you have a big iron ball.
It's not that big.
It's about the size of a cricket ball.
I am bull, and you throw it towards a small wooden jack
and whoever gets closest wins.
And they're trying to smarten it up.
They've stopped people from wearing jeans,
and also they're trying to stop this bulliganism,
which is alcohol-fueled brawls between players,
which has been tarnishing the sport for the last few years.
And it's an extremely traditional French past time.
I've seen people playing it.
People playing it in a square near where I used to live.
On the piece.
I've been to playing that square.
It's brilliant in South London.
It's very nice.
You love it.
Yeah, and you hire the equipment out from the pub.
Did you get into any fights?
It's huge, bro.
I'm not allowed back to South London, actually.
Well, I thought this can't possibly be true,
but it goes back about 10 years.
So in 2017 some referees had to be given special protection
from Bulligans.
There were death threats at the World Cup in 2016.
Yeah.
And there are so many stories.
One team said they were going to rip their heads off
another team exactly like them when.
And then the tournament's organisers said this sort of incident
happens quite often in Patonk in response to that.
There was one guy who got a 200 Euro fine in a four-year ban
for hurling a Bull at his rival.
Geez.
They are hard bulls.
They are hard, don't they?
You don't want that.
I think one guy, according to an economist article,
was jailed for shooting dead a Patonk rival
when one of his Bulls landed on his foot.
What?
What year was this?
It didn't say it just said in brackets.
It was an economist article about Patonk and then it was just like,
for instance, the guy from Grenoble,
who was jailed for shooting dead a rival when his Bull landed
on his foot, closed brackets, no more information.
Oh my god.
So I found three examples of people who've died
in the last 10 years playing Patonk
and I was not looking for them.
They just kept coming up in my search results.
One of them was trampled by a runaway circus elephant, though.
So I don't know if that counts as...
It's the dangers of Patonk.
That's what eventually cleared us off the South London.
Right.
Actually, this thing about them not being able to wear jeans,
it's annoyed a lot of Patonk players
and one player has protested by turning up
to an official tournament game dressed as a clown,
which now I hear about it.
Seems a little bit too soon, almost.
Yeah.
Although, at least if another player's Bull lands on your shoe,
it probably won't hurt your foot.
There is one thing that Patonk players are now allowed to do,
which they weren't a little while ago,
which is to drink during matches.
And this is competition players.
Oh, yes, you're right.
They are trying to professionalise, aren't they?
Because they wanted to be an Olympic thing.
But they did persuade the world...
This is a very French thing.
They did persuade the world anti-doping agency
it is okay to have a glass of pasties
or whatever during a competition.
And they've been allowed to, as of 2008,
but they are still asked to abstain
from steroids, growth hormones, heroin and cocaine.
I can't imagine heroin is going to help you play for talk that much.
It's a slow game.
I mean, steroids aren't going to help you either.
Oh, come on. You can get some proper power in your...
If you're really big, you can just kind of lean over it.
Put the ball down.
Doesn't make your arms lengthen.
Don't really, don't really fit it.
I think a stretch arm is strong.
I can't get over how full of both of your arguments are.
And these steroids don't lengthen your arms.
And James, it's not really a game of power.
Look, we'll have a game soon.
But there are a few different shots you can play.
One way you just try and get it close to the jack
and another one where you try and bash the other guys
ball out of the way.
It's kind of like Quidditch.
Yeah, because in Quidditch, there are people who are trying to score points.
And those are the people in Potonk who are shooting for the jack.
The tiny wooden thing.
And then you've also got shooters in Potonk
who are the, you would be the bludgers who try to, you know,
they're just attacking the people.
And they've played it on Titan.
Look, everyone actually breaks down eventually.
I'm just saying, you've got Schesgeras and Nockers.
Do you?
Talking of Nockers, can we talk about kissing the funny?
So, kissing the funny is when, if you lose a match 30 nil,
you then have to kiss the funny,
which is where you ideally have to kiss the bare bottom of a lady
called Fanny.
But as there isn't always one available,
you can kiss a picture of the bare bottom of a lady called Fanny,
or quite often they have like small statues of Fanny's nearby
that you could kiss the bottom of.
So, do you, is that part of the equipment list for a match?
I assume it.
Every club has its own model, Fanny, norm, inference.
Wow.
They have them specially made.
They have a match where someone lost very badly.
And a local waitress, I think, called Fanny said,
"You'll have to kiss me on the cheek if you lose."
And then when the male lost really, really badly,
she said, "Well, you have to kiss me on the bum now."
And some clubs in Provence have special rugs to nil on
while you're kissing the statue of the one we call Fanny on the arse.
Yeah.
It's a weird boy prayer.
Do you know why England is not so good at batonk?
Is it because we have crown green bowling or tempin bowling,
so we don't really play it as much?
That's a nice idea.
I think, well, my theory, as to why we're not a world leading petonk power,
is that you like to wear jeans a lot,
so we won't be able to play anymore.
That's another one.
This is a bit more historical, is that ever the third for bad people from playing,
legally, you were not allowed to play, especially if you were an archer.
And this goes back, you know, loads of sports were banned if you were an archer
because you had to be doing your archery practice.
But until the 18th century,
Artifices, Laborers, Apprentices and Servants were banned from playing
any time outside Christmas.
Really?
Yeah, which is not good for training.
And also, yeah, because Christmas, the ground's going to be cold.
Yes.
Snowy maybe, so you might not be able to play anyway.
Poor playing conditions.
Good point.
Yeah, it was thought of as a kind of corrupt sport, wasn't it?
I'd like only people of ill-repute played it.
It was associated with saloons and gambling and stuff like that.
Or bites of the gambling.
The gambling.
Well, you say that Britain isn't a petonk powerhouse.
But we do have teams.
In 2002, Purcell sponsored and paid for the kit of the British nude petonk team.
Paid for the kit.
Yes.
Sorry, I think it was mostly sweat buns.
So, do you say, say, a Purcell?
Purcell.
So, exactly the clothes detergent brand.
Why do you associate yourself with something as risque as nude petonk?
Risky and also not terribly popular, I imagine.
Purcell makes your clothes disappear.
What are they trying to tell you?
Do they turn up to competition saying, "Look, we're not wearing jeans."
I've got a quote from Pat Thompson, the team manager and president of British naturism.
We might not have a Beckham or an Owen, but landing this sponsorship
is set to boost the profile of naturist petonk just as we go head to head with the World Cup.
Head to head.
What year was that?
2002.
And see, did anyone pay attention to that World Cup?
I think not.
Patent kind of advertises itself as being good for kind of all ages, all genders.
It's not a super physically testing sport.
Even to the extent that you can buy magnets attached to cords
so you can pick up the balls without having to bend down.
And there's nothing, so that's fine, it's all like you go fishing for your peton balls.
Exactly, but you won't pick up the wooden one, will it?
No, no.
So you're...
God, you're right.
What do you do about that?
Long Hoover.
You could get those claw things that park rangers have, you know?
Yeah, you're right.
That's called a piglet.
It's called a kosch on it, to that little wooden thing.
Yes.
Or, like, we would call it a jack, right?
One of England's best players is called Jack Blows.
Really?
Nice.
It's a really cool one.
So prior to researching this, did anyone else assume that Patonk was an onomatopoeic name?
Yeah.
Patonk?
I mean, it is onomatopoeic.
I just wasn't named for that reason, yeah.
Yeah, just not intentionally so.
There was an old man who loved to play ball, which involved taking three steps and then throwing your ball.
He had terrible roomatism, so as if you could do it sitting down.
His friend said, yes, and they agreed to be stationary when they threw the ball as well.
And that is Patonk, which comes from the Provence words, 'pedtanko', which means 'feet still'.
Yeah.
And I think that's really nice as an origin, because it originates in basically early disability rights, right?
It used to be much more active, so I think in Provence it was called Provence Long.
And you threw the ball really far.
It was often about throwing the ball quite a long way.
And the ball for some reason, I couldn't discover, was sheathed in nails.
And it resulted in so many injuries in the 18th and 19th centuries that it was banned,
almost everywhere.
Sorry, can I just say, so the nails, the spiky bit is on the inside, right?
Yeah.
Because the way you said it, it could have possibly been sticking out.
So it's basically cock, and then you would stick a load of nails so that the outside of it was the heads of the nails.
And so that's how you got your iron kind of ball.
So that's how you got the weight or whatever.
Yeah, so it's not like a hedgehog or something.
Yeah, got it.
That would be very dangerous though.
Yeah, but maybe more fun.
To use a hedgehog?
No, no.
I was thinking of the sticky apple.
Oh, sorry.
Yeah, I was thinking, oh, this is Alice in Wonderland.
I'm sure I've read this before.
With a real piglet.
Thank you for everything.
Well, you know why the metal balls came about from the technology of the First World War.
So sort of making small mines and bombs and stuff.
Using that technology that was improved in the First World War, they could then make petonk balls.
Wow.
Yeah.
So it was good for something.
It was.
You know what, what is it good for?
Petonk.
Finally, we've answered the question.
Petonk balls are dangerous objects officially.
According to the Federal Transportation Safety Administration, you're not allowed to take them
onto aircrafts.
Oh, yeah.
Did you find an example of that?
No.
I found a guy who, he's a star player from Jersey, Keith Boliad.
And he had his luggage seized on route to a big competition in Denmark.
Because it had three suspicious looking, perfectly round, iron balls in it.
And obviously they thought, well, this could be a bomb.
What is it?
And he had to borrow another set.
And someone else is trousers.
Because he traveled in jeans.
And the umpire wouldn't let him play in the competition.
Oh, really?
So his game suffered very badly.
Because he was playing with a set.
He wasn't familiar with the weights.
And different trousers.
Yeah.
It's important to like, use your own balls.
He says that they have slightly different weightings and slightly possibly even different sizes.
Or just that he was used to his feel of his own balls.
He did size.
This is the nudist Petonk ball, actually.
Okay.
Well, you should wrap up.
Thanks so much for listening.
We'll be back again next week with another episode of No Such Thing as a Fish.
In the meantime, if you want to get in touch with us, you can do so on these guys.
Twitter accounts.
James is on.
@JamesHarkin
Andy's on.
And Andrew Hunter M.
And James Rawson is on.
@JamesRawson.
Sorry.
It shouldn't be like James is the obvious James and your James Rawson.
You just call me other James.
Brandon James is on.
@JamesHarkin.
Say it again.
@JamesRawson.
And also he is in control of all of our other social media accounts.
So if you want to abuse him anywhere, that's where to do it.
If that's if you want to abuse anyone anywhere, just do it on social media.
It's fashionable.
If you want to get in touch with us as a group, you can get in touch with us via @No Such Thing
or email podcast@QI.com.
That's all for this week.
See you again next week.
Goodbye.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(upbeat music)